
Please go to the necessary folders for more details,
1) TASK IV Diffusion Models for Gravitational Lensing Simulation
2) TASK VI Foundational model for Gravitational lensing

Deeplense, which is a part of the umbrella organization ML4Sci , primarily explores the use of state of the art deep learning techniques for the study of Strong Gravitational lensing and Dark matter substructure.
Dark Matter: Everything from people to planets is made up of matter. Basically, matter is defined as any substance that has mass and occupies space. But there is more to the universe than the matter that we actually see. Scientists, through observation of the cosmos, have figured out that there are more mysterious things, like dark matter, dark energy, that make up the universe in addition to regular matter. Hence, identifying what dark matter actually is, is the most significant area of research in the field of physics. Even though there has been a large number of ideas that have been proposed to formulate what dark matter could be, it still remains a mystery.


Figure 1 : ( The universe is made up of three components: normal or visible matter (5%), dark matter (27%), and dark energy (68%). Image credits: https://science.nasa.gov/universe/overview/building-blocks/#dark-matter )
Gravitational lensing: Strong gravitational lensing is a promising probe of the substructure of dark matter, which in turn would help us in understanding its effects and, more fundamentally, what it could be made up of. Gravitational lensing is a phenomenon in which light is bent due to the gravity of huge celestial objects ( like a group of galaxies ), essentially making them behave like a cosmic lens. Since Dark Matter is something that doesn't interact with electromagnetic forces, which makes it invisible to us. However, by observing how galaxy clusters that contain dark matter bend and distort the light of more distant galaxies lying behind the cluster, we can map their influence.    

Figure 2 ( Strong Gravitational lensing illustration. Image credits: https://www.astro.caltech.edu/~george/qsolens/ )
When 2 galaxy clusters get aligned perfectly down the line of sight with Earth ( as depicted in Fig. 2 ), the light that comes from the source galaxy cluster ( the one in the background ) would be bent due bending of space time by the foreground galaxy cluster’s gravity. Hence, light from the background galaxy cluster would take multiple paths to cross the foreground galaxy clusters, which would create multiple images of the former when observed by our telescopes. This by chance alignment of two galaxy clusters is called a strong gravitational lens. So, in our case, we would be observing the background galaxy to be a ring around the foreground galaxy, more specifically, it's called the Einstein ring. Hence, a strong gravitational lensing setup provides a peek into the substructure of dark matter and many more. Unfortunately, when it comes to strong gravitational lens data, there isn’t much available. Which means we wouldn't be able to train deep learning models to probe into dark matter substructure. Hence, there is a pressing need for developing methods that generate realistic synthetic lenses. 

